to Dr. Haskell Norman in San Francisco on 14 June, 1991.
And you started, Doctor, by saying, by commenting on the phrase, the concept of bibliomania.
Yes, what I was trying to call your attention was there is no equivalent terminology to my recollection that applies to any other form of
collecting or accumulation of objects.
And I haven't studied it that carefully, but I don't recall any.
And I've always been interested in the fact that the pathology, the term, you know, maybe applies primarily to people who, in some ways, collect books.
Now, obviously, the term that has historical origin and may, in some instances, may be justified
But the obvious term, just like any other mania, it applies an exaggerated form of meditation rather than a more, shall we say, normal form of meditation.
But after all, what do you do with a term hobby or adaptation?
One thinks of hobbies, one thinks that's a perfectly acceptable term in our society.
And I think that one has to differentiate between something that may be an allocation from something that becomes, if you will, an obsession, are viewed as madness.
And I think this is where the civil line has to be drawn, I would say.
That's my response to your title of your book.
Let's make clear that when I was thinking of a title, it wasn't because I planned to write about the—and I'm putting quotation marks around the word—madness or the mania.
But again, it goes back to the Isaiah Thomas— Right, but you see, when you read the public in general, you're emphasizing one aspect of it which I think—now, after all, I know some of the people that
you've interviewed.
I mean, I know them well, but I would hesitate to say that they're mad.
I believe... Well, when Steven Blumberg was arrested out in Iowa... Steven Blumberg's an exception.
Okay, and I've interviewed him, by the way.
I've interviewed him.
When he was arrested, they said,
well, this man is a bibliomaniac.
That's true.
Maybe in his case it's true.
And maybe in his case it's true.
And I feel, you see, one theme I hope to explore in my book is how the book collector has provided a function of helping to preserve the artifacts of human achievement.
Oh, of course.
But that's no different than the art collector or others.
Well, but a work of art is a unique work in many cases.
Books are printed and have always been the poor cousin to the works of art.
So many things have been considered ephemeral or worthless.
It depends on whether you're collecting prints or painting.
If you're collecting prints, you're closer to the category of books because once you get into a series of, say,
200 of Chagall's lithographs, you're not so far from a book that's limited edition.
So I think it may be true it's a poor cousin in the sense that economically in our market books don't claim the same kind of money as the New York Times article.
I think
I think the difference, of course, is the visual accessibility of what a book is and what a painting is.
I think, you know, people can look at it.
You can't really display your library as well as you can if you had to do it in a great painting.
So there's a difference in terms of, on the other hand, I presume you can't display
Well, in his case, I'm using him as the example of a collector.
Was he also a businessman?
Did he sell some of the stuff?
Not the books.
No, we don't know for sure.
That was a later development book.
Well, I've covered it pretty carefully.
In fact, I'm the only journalist who's interviewed him, and we've actually corresponded even since he's been incarcerated.
Is he in jail?
Well, he's awaiting sentencing, but he's being held without blood.
Well, I think that, I think, obviously, that anybody that steals something is going to get some fat again.
Wouldn't you?
It isn't, like, you can't just call him mad, necessarily, because not all mad people steal.
But what makes another aspect that makes him very interesting to me is the fact that there's focus in his book collection.
It wasn't a haphazard gathering of Americana.
I thought he had a Nuremberg Chronicle.
Well, but you can justify the Nuremberg Chronicle.
You can justify anything.
Well, because it's the last great history
It's the last great history published that fails to mention the discovery of North America.
It was published in 1493.
So if you have a serious Americana collection that has place in it— I'm not going to—it's not necessary to take issue on that.
But the main thing I have—the main point I'm trying to get to is I think that the motivation is so different in your interest in motivation.
Are there any number of us?
I don't think one can just start and generalize and you really feel as individuals.
I know I've talked to other people who collect them.
You don't learn anything about significant things about the motivation really on an ordinary encounter.
You learn only if you have a chance to study carefully what's going on in the person's life.
I think it's a little hazardous to try and make too many general motivations without the motivations.
Because after all, you know, why does one collect books, for example?
Assuming you have the means to collect, why would you collect books rather than something else?
That's a good question to begin with.
Now, some people who are wealthy enough can collect more than one thing.
I know one collector I had occasion to visit at a great library.
His wife collected great paintings.
So between the two of them, they covered two important areas of collections.
And so it was interesting.
Now, he happened to have scientific background, so there was a little bit more of a motivation on his part.
Now, I never did know.
was that motivated his wife.
I didn't know either enough well that I'm just mentioning.
If you ask yourself a question, you can start with that.
Just like you can ask yourself a question while you're interested in something.
Have you ever resolved for yourself why some people collect books as opposed to paintings?
No, not really because how can you
I think most people that collect books have a certain intellectual curiosity, I think, about books, period, and what books represent to them.
After all, I think we all start to use books to read from, and depending on what the acquisition of knowledge means to people, I think books become important to some people more than others, why they become
Utilizes objects rather than sources of knowledge is a difficult another question.
But I think most people, for example, almost any scholar you'll encounter has something of a library.
If nothing else, he has borrowed from the university rows of books in his office.
So there are sources of information which scholars lean on.
Do you have a difference between them?
I don't believe we have a difference between them.
No, but there's some reason I say that.
I think it all starts with a certain amount of no.
I think the transition between collecting books as objects and collecting books for information is one of the things that differentiates between, if you will,
Well, I have not seen a catalog of your collection yet.
I have not seen a catalog, of course, of your collection.
We can get to that, but my point is I understand that it's outstanding, that what you have put together is close to being preeminent in what it does.
I hope so.
I would imagine that some of the books, the printed books that you have, and extraordinarily rare editions, are probably available and inexpensive.
You could probably, if you wanted just the information that was contained therein, you could go to the library or go and purchase it.
Oh, absolutely.
I just said that with differentiation.
Okay.
But my question for you is, how do you justify the acquisition of the rare
You, Dr. Norman, justify the acquisition.
Well, I think, as I said, it changes.
One has to acknowledge that there's a difference between using books for, as I said, work or information studies and for some other purpose, which I call, if you will, play, pleasure, a hobby.
And I think that's the important difference.
Now, once you get into that aspect,
then many other factors get involved.
For example, in the first place, you have to have an interest in acquisition, and that's a psychological factor.
You know, people who are interested in accumulation and acquisition frequently start out in a young age, don't they?
They collect poster stamps, things like that.
marbles, whatever children do, and some are more serious and other than that.
But it still starts out as a hobby, right?
And so it depends on to what degree that influences you in terms of your later life experience and activity.
Now, if obviously it remains within certain bounds,
You know, just like any other part of your personality, if your personality is adaptive in terms of society, then it's considered reasonably normal.
If it's maladaptive, then you can start talking about madness and things like that.
So, I mean, it's a common sense thing.
So a hobbyist thing can be perfectly harmless,
with what you want to say and provide a certain amount of recreation and pleasure.
After all, there are all kinds of motivations to get into.
Why does one want to do one once?
If you're going to collect, I suppose, for reasons other than industry, when you're perfectly correct, you're not going to use the first edition of a particular book, particularly if you don't want to,
depreciate its value if you want to look at it that way.
You know, every time you open a red book, you exhaust it a little bit.
So you don't need that.
So you do it because it's something you want to be identified with.
And then it becomes a matter of having something that distinguishes you from the next guy.
I mean, after what is that?
For example, I just, you know, when I first started out, I wasn't really that interested in first editions particularly.
I was interested in getting things that I could use.
And then I decided when I was on training as a psychoanalyst that I should buy a first edition of Lloyd Dutron's iPhone.
I'm sorry, which, sir?
It was Interpretation of Dreams.
And so, I won't go into the details as to why that occurred, but anyhow, at that time it seemed like something interested me.
And then after I bought that, I thought, well, why not?
Maybe I should select a few of these others.
And I remember I could still read German then.
So we had very excellent English translations that were available, much easier.
So I knew at that point I wasn't buying these books for...
I decided, well, it's kind of fun.
Let's see if I can collect enough of these so that I can have a set.
You know, there's a certain amount of compulsion to get into it.
And so I did that, and I started teaching the history of psychoanalysis, and I would bring my books to the classroom of students.
And I started teaching the history of psychiatry, so I expanded my collection.
I would get books that I could use.
They were still used to rationalize up until those days.
So I combined, if you will.
You were rationalizing, you said?
Yeah, of course, combining business with pleasure.
I didn't need them.
I was, let me see, part of the reason for it was that there was an economic element.
I was not a person of unlimited means, so I couldn't necessarily just simply say that
This was a necessary thing, right?
On the other hand, it wasn't a particular hardship or any problem.
So this became my recreation.
How old were you at a time?
I was in my 30s.
In 1953, I was in my late 30s.
1950, about 62, I mean.
Anyhow, the important element about it was exact.
It also became a kind of form of social, additional social life.
I corresponded with dealers throughout the world and pen pals.
And I used to do this at night when I was finished with my work.
In other words, in those days, I had young families.
I had practice.
So I...
Usually around 10 or 11, my wife would probably by this time have retired, so then I'd pick up my catalogs.
It was an hour of recreation.
In fact, I never visited a bookstore.
You never did?
For a few number of years at the time.
So it was mostly by correspondence.
Did you buy at auction at all?
No, never bought at auction in those days either.
It wasn't a great boy, too.
You must know my own opinion.
I've written some of this up to you, but I'll let you read it.
Oh, great.
I'll let you read it.
Anyhow, so, and this went on, I think, for a number of years.
It was not a particularly, you know,
It was out of interest, I must say, that I pursued with great diligence.
But, you know, certain things interest me.
If I went through a professional meeting, I remember one period I was looking for the etchings of Sigmund Freud, but that was still important to me.
And those were hard to find.
And I don't forget when I was
in New York, and a young Viennese woman there, and she would say to me, aren't you interested in any good art, you know?
As a matter of fact, she would twist my arm into buying a few good things, which I don't regret, and eventually sold.
But that point is, it was not, there was no financial aspect involved in that aspect.
It was strictly intellectual.
Well, the things that you're interested
I think as my financial situation became—there were a few other factors I went into, but I'm not going to skip over those—as my financial situation became better, and through a number of circumstances that you read about, I decided that I wanted
By this time, I had a library that I didn't regard as particularly impressive when I began to compare with other people's libraries.
So competition went into it.
The competition factor did enter into it.
Oh, yes.
I think that's a very obvious thing.
I want to have a better library in my hands.
But better than everyone else.
Not better than everybody else, but maybe as good as some.
It was not possible to have better than everybody else.
In other words,
You know, if you're not an extraordinary wealthy man like Bill Scheid, you can't buy a Gutenberg idol.
So you may have to settle for what you can afford.
Or also be blessed by the fact that you've had two generations head start.
I mean, his library is 125 years old.
But even so, there are some people who still can do it, you know.
So you have to sacrifice your own niche.
So within your own niche, anyhow...
We'll give you the write-up, and I hope you'll use them accordingly, that I wrote for the Introductionist Catalog.
Oh, wonderful.
Great.
Because you'll discover that my meeting with booksellers, which eventually I started to travel more, was very important because I began to learn something about points of bibliography, which I had not been attentive to.
And this was partially through correspondence and partially through experience.
And then meeting some collectors who were substantial collectors in the area that interested me.
So that was very influential.
And so I just decided that, you know, part of the
pleasure with the hunting for books.
In other words, since they were hard to find, it was like fishing, you know.
I used to go fishing when I was a lot younger.
You know, you'd sit around doing a long time.
If you're lucky, you get a bite, and you pull the fish in, right?
So collecting books was, in many respects, similarly, you send out a lot of requests, and if you're lucky, the fish bites, you know.
So you have a want list.
You had a want list.
No, I was not even a very... You know, a want list was not even an easy way to do it.
I had a mental list.
One of the big problems with sending want lists on I discovered was that there were so many people that would feel upset if you bought the book and then they forgot to tell them you no longer had on the want list.
So it got to be... I did it for a while.
I gave that up.
I had my own want list.
The most effective thing was establishing contacts.
I mean, getting people to get to know you, and I say all that.
So the big factor was to see whether you can find these things.
Obviously, at this time, I was very familiar with some of the great collections in my field.
I knew I'd always want to see whether Oostler had one or Sona had one or what they were like.
So if I could find something that I was looking at, I was interested in rarity, I was interested in condition, I was interested in its price.
Of course, I have to be realistic about this because, as I say, unless you have unlimited money, you can't, you know.
Did you interview the people at the garden sale?
When we're done, I'll be happy to tell you.
I will have a chapter on the garden.
Were you able to interview David O'Mara?
No.
Did you know him?
I only met him one time.
I didn't know him.
I just wondered whether he knew anything more than I know.
I probably do.
The reason I want to eventually, there's a book that's in that sale that I mentioned in my write-up about when I first got interested in
some of the, shall we say, the expensive books.
I had made some money.
I had some extra money, which I made through some investments around the early 1960s.
So I was traveling in London, and I had a friend who is a renowned bookseller, and I earned a smile.
I say a friend because he'll be a correspondent for a number of years.
And so I said to him, you know, I think I'd like to buy a great book.
So I said, and he, I remember he had, well, we were just chatting over tea.
I said, if you could pick out one great book, what would you buy?
And he says to me, well, there's a copy of Copernicus that was written by, that was inscribed by Radicus.
And this book, he said, has been in the market for about a year.
And I said, what is it going to cost?
He said, $12,000.
That's not bad.
Oh, it's not bad, right?
So I come back to San Francisco, and this is all written up.
Really?
So I come back to San Francisco, and I'm talking now, visiting Warren Powell.
He was a good friend of mine also.
Diana worked for Warren.
Anyhow, and Herbert M. Evans, who was a great scientist, an old man with a very distinguished and important man, and a bibliophile.
Have you ever heard of him?
Herbert M. Evans?
No, I'm sorry.
Have you heard about him in my introduction?
Because he was a combination of bibliophile and some pathology.
And I'll explain that later.
So Herbert says to me, you're not going to get that book.
I said, how come?
He says, because Harrison Horvath in New York has it.
So I said, well, I thought about it badly.
So I said, well, can you please introduce me to Harrison Horvath?
So anyhow, make a long story short.
I met him, and that was an important meeting.
But so
Not having that book, we went on another tangent, but I'll go back six weeks a minute.
So I would, you know, people would ask me how I got started playing.
I said, well, I started out with the idea of getting this one book, which I missed, and so forth.
So a number of years later, Lou David Feldman, who you may have heard out of the name, was one of the leading booksellers in
He's a subject in my book, too.
Well, I knew Luke Feldman.
And I'd at some point love to get some thoughts of yours.
I'm going to write it down so I don't forget.
Well, Luke Feldman, you know, was a big entrepreneur who didn't really need publicity because he was making a living selling to the University of Texas.
You know, he sold millions and millions of dollars worth of books.
Anyhow, so one time,
In 1968, Lou calls me up and he says, I can get you the book, he said, for $50,000.
Well, I just couldn't pay $50,000 at the time, and so I said, so I just passed it out to Benton.
I'm not as affluent as I can.
I didn't have as much free cash as I would have liked, but I guess I wasn't ready to spend $50,000 on the book.
But Lou knew of my interest in the book, and I talked to him in each book.
So when the book, when Harrison's Library came out, he bought it for $100,000.
And he sold it, I think, for about at least $150,000.
And of course, at the auction, it sold for $400 and something thousand.
So that was my involvement with that book.
But that book was kind of significant.
You asked me about Haven or Worth.
You had met him?
I met him only once.
At a function?
No, I met him and learned how his books were.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
What was your impression?
There was no way of having an impression to be honest.
He seemed like a pedantic sort of man.
Certainly nobody I could get close to.
He didn't try.
For that matter, he didn't amount to me to get the book collected, as far as I knew, until I saw the collection that he owned.
Though I did know that he bought that book when he did after that, but this was before I think he bought that book.
And he bought a copy of Harvey, which Warren sold, which was up to Conrad, which, as you may know, was a clear outlook and been stolen.
Yes, that's right.
It was a piece written.
Maybe, I guess.
Well, anything else you want to add?
Before I forget, if we could just digress a bit on Lou Feldman, your impressions of him.
I liked Lou Feldman.
He was a rather...
Elegant, handsome man.
I meet him in New York.
He liked to have hair, but he wore this lovely fur coat and a big collar and a gold cane.
That's great.
Lou Feldman had started out as a specialist in detective stories.
That's correct.
And he had a great affection for Sherlock Holmes.
By the time I knew him, he was very successful.
This beautiful apartment that he operated out of,
his business.
He had two apartments in New York.
I remember.
And he had some great things.
And, you know, he had any, he had a card block because Harry Ransom was banking him.
I bet he sold him $50,000 million worth of money.
It's hard to say.
We spent a week in Texas for this project.
Do they know anything about it, really?
You mean, if they know, they're not telling them.
They probably don't, because it was a,
You know, Harry Ransom ran that as his own private library, and he was able, you know, that was when oil was available and valuable, and he could raise the money.
We personally think he did a great thing.
I mean... Oh, I'm a great admirer of Luke Feldman.
Don't misunderstand me.
I mean, we think that the HIC is a monument that really needs very little justification.
I agree, you know, he had the foresight to...
I don't know who influenced who between the two of them.
They had a great thing going.
But, you know, he had a lot of power because of the support he was getting.
And so he dominated the book scene in many respects.
I'll never forget.
I don't remember whether he actually...
I don't remember whether they ever bought the Gutenberg Bible, but I remember— They got the Gutenberg Bible, but that came through the Pforzheimer.
Actually, Perot put up the money.
Oh, that came later.
That came later.
But Lewis tried to sell them.
Lewis had died by then, I think.
And he was trying to sell them one.
I remember that.
He was very—you know, Warren Howell was a very good—well, I won't say good friend.
They did business.
I don't know how you evaluate.
That's how I remember.
because I met him in San Francisco for the first time, and we got started talking, and I guess maybe I mentioned that story to him, and that's how we became it.
And I would have dinner with him in New York.
I'd go to New York maybe once or twice a year, and whenever he was alive, I would visit with him when I could, you know, maybe two or three times.
I can't remember how.
Did you buy books from him?
He's a character, and Lou Feldman is a subject in my book.
Well, I don't know who would know him.
I've talked to quite a few people.
But when you get a good picture, you know the story.
I'm sure he was a source of great envy in the book trade when he was alive.
Because he dominated so much, you see.
And he had Texas.
After all, H.P.
Krause was the big man in the book world, and Luke Goldman was sort of an upstart, I think.
And for a number of years, you know, he took on a comparable position, as I would guess, although I can't speak from great knowledge.
What I knew mostly was what Warren Howell would tell me.
From what people say, he really wanted to be known as the man who, behind the man who built the HRC in Texas.
Well, I think it's true.
I don't think there was any question about it.
I remember one time he was telling me, he was
I don't remember exactly, but apparently he was negotiating for the remains of the Elgin marbles from Lord Elgin for the university.
That sounds like a Lou Feltman story, though.
I remember that.
A lot of these people like to talk about their achievements.
So you put together a great collection, then, with
Limitations.
I mean, you imposed limitations on yourself, and yet you were still able to put together what many suggest is a great collection.
How do you explain the success of Stuart Shack?
Luck.
Money and luck.
I said this many years ago.
Now, I think you have to have, what did I say?
First, you have to have health.
In addition to knowing what you want, you have to have a good relationship with the trade.
In other words, if there are ten people who are in the same book, you have to be the lucky one that the people in the trade are going to direct it toward you.
So I think for a number of years I had pretty good relationships with the trade.
Then you have to also be in a position to pay the bill when you have the opportunity.
As long as the books were not too expensive, there weren't too much interest.
I mean, a big factor is also the time you're collecting because, in other words, right now it would be a very difficult time, relatively speaking, because books are much scarcer, and also they're much more expensive, relatively speaking.
You know, 40 years ago you could buy some of these books for, for example,
The first edition I paid, I bought a Freud's, and it was $75.
Now you probably have to pay $10,000 for it, so it makes a difference whether $75,000, $75 I had.
What was the title of that book again, I'm sorry?
The one that you take?
The Traumdeutung, 1900.
It's The Interpretation of Dreams.
Do you collect in several and many languages?
Yes, whatever languages the books are written in.
Not necessarily could read them all, although I have some familiarity with those little languages.
Did you ever consider it more than a hobby?
I mean, like what, a business?
No.
My son, of course, does.
I'm interested in that.
Is this a coincidence, by the way, that Jeremy went into books?
Well, he can tell you that one.
My version might be different.
Clearly, books were a very important part of your home.
In my life, in our home, yes.
Our children were exposed to the home.
My wife is a great reader, and we encourage our children to read.
I have two children.
My daughter is a physician.
She's not a collector.
Yes, she's there, but she doesn't collect.
My wife does some interesting collecting.
What does she practice?
My daughter, internal medicine.
Have you always been a Californian, by the way?
No, I was born in Massachusetts.
Oh, really?
Where?
Lynn, Massachusetts.
Lynn?
I was born in Lowell, which is nice.
Well, not so far from here.
I'm familiar with Wood Street.
And when did you come out here?
California?
Yeah.
January 1, 1947, Uncle Sam, United States Army.
And is there a biographical thing that we could have?
Not about that.
No, I mean about just if there's something that I would
bothering you with the biographical background stuff?
I don't think I have any on my biography, but I have something on my book collection.
Anything else?
Can you think of anything like that, Dr. Norman?
Yeah, we interviewed a physician down in Los Angeles, Dr. Pincus, Erwin Pincus.
Have you seen him?
Yeah, we saw him two days ago.
Handled his Harvey and his Copernicus as a matter of fact.
Nice man.
Very nice man, yeah.
And one thing I've noticed, and maybe it's coincidental or whatever, but so many
really good and dedicated book collectors happen to be physicians.
And I wonder if there's any of you.
And this is through history.
This isn't just now.
Well, I don't know the answer to that.
I think that for a long time there wasn't that much information available to doctors that they could use in the treatment of patients.
and a lot of the information that was available was historic information.
You know, up through the Renaissance, people were reading the documents that were preserved from the Greek and Roman eras, and it was a big transition during the Renaissance when they began to have a more scientific approach, if you will.
You know, the whole idea of the
the rebirth of learning and so forth, which had been, if you will, inhibited by the religious element and so forth, started then.
But there weren't any significant gains in medicine until, after all, last century, in terms of the ability to treat disease.
I mean, the bacterial concept of disease has established in the last century, so doctors would depend on what they
hopefully they could lean on authorities for.
So books were very important.
Now obviously the whole idea of learning from patients progressed from the beginning of the Renaissance when they started dissecting bodies and they started looking, observing patients, you know, as if this, it wasn't necessarily a new idea, but it was new because they began to depart from historical authority so that
Books became very important, and the combination, you see, of studying your patient and using books is very important.
Now, for this, you didn't need old books.
The practice had libraries.
Now, as collectors, I think it's the same as today.
I think that some people were more interested in the acquisition aspect.
Some were interested in the hobby aspect.
I think the big impetus for our generation came from Sir William Osler, who was an important American physician, a Canadian-American physician.
You'll find that in my opinion, too.
How many doctors at the end of the year besides Jack Pinkus?
Not many, but it's just a phenomenon that I've noticed.
Well, I don't know that many.
I know Jack Pinkus.
I know a few others.
And he has one of the outstanding collections that I'm aware of.
And I don't know, you know, I don't know.
I mean, I've noticed it more through history.
Well, through history, but of course, it's true because, well, my son wrote that and some of that up because he was interested in people with catalogs and libraries.
And, and,
Jeremy wrote that up?
Yeah, it's going in our catalog.
Oh, is it?
Good.
When is your catalog going to be published again?
You want to lift your thing up there, Diana, and show the brochure.
These are for us?
Oh, wonderful.
That's the prospectus?
This is the prospectus.
Oh, great.
And that's it?
This is you, Diana?
Are you familiar?
Oh, this is great.
Thank you.
Are you familiar with that essay that was written in the psychiatric journal about 20 years ago by a psychiatrist named, I think it's Wiener, about bibliomania?
Yeah, not Wiener.
It should be, probably.
It's about the only professional article.
Anything useful?
Well, I mean, he really goes into a disquisition.
Do you know what journal it is?
I'm going to send you a copy of it.
In fact, I don't have one with me.
I don't have one with me.
I thought I might have learned.
I'm going to leave you my card now.
Was he a real collector?
It doesn't indicate.
Or was he just speculating?
No, he must have been a collector, because he really knew the history.
a lot of the cases, the famous cases, the Libri case, and the Libri case, and the other things.
So he knew the history, and he got through the books, and he gave some analyses, I guess.
I'll absolutely make sure I send you copies when you get home.
I just had wondered if you had probably caused some
It's about 15 or 66, I guess, when it was published.
And I just found it scrolling through the UMass Medical, the University of Massachusetts Medical School in Worcester.
I just go up there one day and went through their file.
I'm not too familiar with much that's been written about collecting, but it's rather interesting.
Charles Darwin wrote about this a little bit in his autobiography.
He did?
That's right.
I'm going to help you out today.
He said he was a collector, and when he was young, he collected, let's see, I guess, he collected shells and coins, and I guess, Franks, which were the postage things on those days, and I guess,
I know he collected beagles, you know, and so forth.
So he made a comment that if you're, and nobody else in this family was a collector, but if you are a collector, you may become a natural historian, as he regards a virtuoso or a miser.
And these are the, so in other words, he saw the range of possibilities.
So you can see that he included the pathology.
the extraordinary achiever, because after all, people, how do you differentiate between people who are so creative and collect so many ideas that they can put together and assemble?
And so that's what we regarded, I guess, as a virtue.
At what point did you realize that you were really putting together something more than the satisfaction of a pastime?
Well, you were assembling a major collection.
Well, I think this was supplemented by my son, for example, who got interested in the book world in 1964.
And I think that this was a very important factor in my life, because he became a companion
And he actually went through my collection before he started his business, which was some 29 years ago.
And I felt rather pleased that he thought it was a good thing.
He was young then, of course.
He had been working for Warren Howell, you see, for a number of years.
That happened to be a job that he got.
because at one time he needed a job, and Warren was the only businessman I knew, so it worked out well.
That's how he got started.
I think I'll have to talk to Jeremy.
Oh, I think you should, because he knows a lot more about these things than I do.
Well, but I'd like to know a little bit about... He'll be back on Tuesday.
I'll give him a call.
Yeah, but so I think that that was an important factor, because it always concerned me that
My health had been pretty precarious at 30 times in my life, and I was always concerned that I had a collection of valuable books, but that there was nobody that I could depend on to disperse anything that happened to me.
So when he got involved in the book trade, I began to feel reassured that he was interested, and I knew that that was
Now, I'd already bought most of the, or many of the most important books that were in the catalog, that really made the collection important, but at that time I had more freedom to feel that it wouldn't just get lost, in other words.
And we also, we sort of had an agreement that, when he started his business,
I naturally, as a parent, was very supportive, particularly in finding books as an interest in me.
So I lent him, I should say, I didn't lend him money, I lent him books.
I lent him books because I didn't want to sell them to him either.
I'd give them to him either.
So I made it easy for him to dance.
you have to owe me a favor someday, and that is, someday you can catalog my library.
And that's true.
I mean, so we had that deal.
Well, so that was a big impetus.
How many years ago was that?
Well, that was 21 years ago, I guess, when he started business.
So the pledge was made 20 years ago to catalog the library.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
And, well, you know, because, well, I guess he had his own reasons for agreeing to it.
But the important thing was, that gave me the feeling, you see, that I had somebody I could depend on.
Because it wasn't fair to my wife, and knowing how collections are frequently picked up by people, particularly if you don't know what they're worth, you know.
And since this was an important asset to my family, I was really,
That made it possible for me to comfortably continue to collect.
And so, you know, most of the important books that are illustrated there, I owned by that time.
But I continued to collect, of course, as you read, until a few months ago.
So I just thought.
So this has gone on for seven years now.
Is your collection essentially complete then?
No.
But I mean, in your mind, you said you collected up until several months ago.
How are you still looking is what I'm asking.
Well, this is a moot point now.
Once you publish a catalog of a collection, you sort of, this is a moot point.
I can't put any more on the catalog.
Yeah, but you could bring out an addendum.
There's no plan to issue another catalog.
Yeah, but you must run across things that you say, gee, that really belongs in the collection.
Yeah, well, of course, but I've been doing that for years, and I've had to reject them too, you know?
How many volumes approximately is the Baby Day?
About 2,600.
What is your hope for the library?
Well, would you like to see it remain as a collection?
Well, I really don't think that I'm going to decide that.
I'll put it very simply.
I'm not going to...
donated to a university, looking to pride my family of the financial aspect.
I think that's a realistic thing.
The catalog would be sufficient to satisfy my ego, if you will.
And if it's decided, it won't be decided, I don't think, during my lifetime.
would probably either be dispersed at auction, or it could be sold on block, depending on whatever arrangement they want to make.
But my own feeling, I thought about this very seriously, and I just decided, it's not worth it to me.
You know, if I'm gone, what difference would they have a wing somewhere?
I don't think it'll get a wing, but anyhow.
But the point about it is, so I expect my
my heirs to get some of the proceeds.
Maybe some will keep some books, maybe some will take money.
He would like some of the books, I'm sure, and I hope he can get them too.
So therefore, the production, the publication of the catalog for you is a great event?
It's a very important event, because you see,
If you go over my experience as a collector, I had more contact with the catalogs of libraries I did with the actual books because, you know, I couldn't go to Yale every so often or go to McGill.
I went to Uppsala once.
I couldn't even see the books, you know.
So the catalogs of the libraries were the tools I used.
And this is going to be a great tool.
I think it's going to be a great source of information.
Is it going to be very richly, the bibliography, are you going to really give the points and are you really going to try and give as thorough a bibliography as you can for each of these?
Yes, each description will have relations and plate counts.
And if there are issue points, there's a problem with issue points.
There's, I think, that I've pointed out, which haven't been pointed out before as well.
Would you look at a sample?
There's a sample.
Yeah, there is a sample.
There's a sample, a couple of samples.
In here?
Right in there, yeah.
Well, we're probably going to buy a set of these, actually.
Good.
That's one of my collecting interests is catalogs.
Well, as far as we know, there's no science catalog for science that has ever been compared with this as of now, maybe in the future, because all of those that I'm familiar with do not have all of the descriptions and the detail that they have spent all this time on.
Have you been on it from the beginning?
We've been on it.
They're going to have big celebrations.
What's the limitation going to be?
I guess this is a question I always ask.
How do you enjoy your collection?
Once you acquire, do you get the most satisfaction out of the acquisition?
Do you continue to enjoy it?
It varies.
For example, now that I have the leisure, see, I'm virtually retired professionally.
So I, I guess it was 1985, we put out an exhibit for the National Association of Bibliophiles that came here.
So I was able to show my collection to them, some of it.
Last, earlier this last year, we, we,
I had an exhibit of my Freud collection at Stanford in conjunction with an exhibit of Freud's art collection.
And I guess September, that's going to the Groyer Club in New York for the Freud material.
So I've enjoyed that aspect.
I've talked about it in various places, in Copenhagen.
I've talked about it in San Francisco.
I've written more recently now at times things that are either directly or indirectly related to some of the things.
Now, as far as, a lot of it depends on the impetus.
Today I'm enjoying my collection.
I'm talking to you about it.
Actually, there aren't that many people within I can discuss it.
Do you have any of the books here?
Yes, I have.
Maybe we can see a few at some point, if that's okay.
Yeah, we can see.
You know, of course, that Freud gave his only lecture in North America, in Worcester.
Yeah, I know, of course.
At Clark.
Yeah, at Clark, uh, and the Clark lectures.
Well, everybody knows that.
That's one of Worcester's great claims, Robert Goddard and Sigmund Freud.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Well, how much time do you want to spend?
Well, I could ask a few more questions, but I don't want you to, I don't want to extend my welcome either.
I guess there's still that lingering, I'm just going to turn these things on the other side because I think they're ready to turn on.